# ViralNGSBenchmarking

This repository contains supplementary data and code for a study titled "Comparative Evaluation of Bioinformatic Pipelines for Full-Length Viral Genome Assembly," published on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.03.13.584779).

## Data + Configuration/Parametrization
To enable easier reproducibility of the analysis, we provide the data and configuration files for all three datasets (SIM, SS+NGS, SGS-FULL) used in our study. Here we preliminarily publish the Sanger and next-generation sequencing results of the 49 Hungarian HIV samples of the SS+NGS dataset. These results will be publicly available in INSDC data repositories (GenBank and SRA) within 1 year from the point of publication in a scientific journal. Until then, the sequencing results uploaded to this repository can only be used for the replication of our benchmarking analysis. Any other use requires the authors' permission. 

## Raw result files

### Combined raw results of all analyses
* **GABM_NGS_results.csv**: Runtime and memory benchmarking results on the NGS (Ode et al.) dataset
* **GABM_SIM_results_revision.csv**: Benchmarking results using simulated HIV-1 quasispecies data
* **GABM_SIM_150.csv**: Benchmarking results using simulated HIV-1 quasispecies data with 2x150bp paired-end Illumina data
* **GABM_SGS_results.csv**: Benchmarking results using the Vibhol et al. SGS dataset
* **GABM_SSNGS_HUN_results.csv**: Benchmarking results using Hungarian Sanger and next generation sequencing results from the same samples

### SGS diversity calculation results
* **Shankarappa.xlsx**: Diversity statistics of the Shankarappa et al. dataset
* **Vibholm.xlsx**: Diversity statistics of the Vibholm et al. dataset

### QUAST reports and genome assemblies of the SIM dataset
We uploaded all benchmark sequences, genome assemblies and QUAST reports and a subset of simulated sequencing reads (1 replicate/scenario) for our in silico analyses. 

## Scripts
The scripts in this repository have been developed to benchmark four bioinformatic pipelines (shiver, SmaltAlign, viralngs, V-Pipe) for full-length viral genome assembly.
### Main scripts
* **gabm.sh**: Main pipeline script organizing different steps of the analysis for one sample.
* **gabm_batch.sh**: A wrapper script for gabm.sh. Initializes sample directory for gabm.sh using files in the batch directory.
* **gabm_batch.wrapper.sh**: A simple wrapper for gabm_batch.sh to run several different batch analyses after each other.

### Utilities
* **vngs.sh**: Script supplied to the viralngs docker container including all steps of genome assembly with additional runtime and memory benchmarking.
* **align_MAFFT.py**: Multiple alignment of .fasta files using MAFFT.
* **changeAmbiguousToA.py**: change IUPAC ambiguity codes in Sanger sequences due to software incompatibility before base calling using NGS data.
* **correctSangerByVariants.py**: Corrects Sanger sequences in position where NGS data strongly indicates a different base call to provide consistency between datasets.
* **multifastaDiversity.py**: Calculation of average pairwise Hamming distances in a multifasta alignment.
* **deleteGapsAlignment.py**: Deletes gap characters from multifasta alignments.
* **calculateCoordinatesByMotifs.py**: Calculates the coordinates of a genetic interval in a .fasta sequence based on a start and end motif.
* **cropGenomeByCoordinates.py**: Crops HIV-1 genomes (.fasta) based on a start and end coordinate on the HXB2 reference genome.
* **changeNBases.py**: Changes unidentified bases ('N') to a random nucleotide in a .fasta file.
* **changesToNBases.py**: Changes special IUPAC nucleotide ambiguity codes to 'N'.
* **compBamLiftover.py**: Compares .bam aligments mapped to highly similar reference sequences.
* **VCF.py**: Read in utilities for .vcf file in Python developed by Kamil Slowikowski.
* **VariantAnalysis.py**: Compares .vcf variant calls devised from highly similar reference sequences.

### Scripts for gathering results
* **gather_results.sh**: Goes through the folder structure generated by gabm_batch_wrapper.sh and calls gather_results.R in every sample directory. After that, initiates the merging of results by merge_results.R
* **gather_results.R**: Collects the benchmarking results in every sample directory.
* **merge_results.R**: Merges the tables generated by gather_results.R.

### Extra scripts
* **SGS_rename.sh**: Convenience function for renaming .fasta files.
* **ss_ngs_download.sh**: Convenience function for downloading data from NCBI Nucleotide and the Sequence Read Archive.
